docs/source/AdministratorGuide/ServerInstallations/environment_variable_configuration.rst, before:

.. _bashrc_variables:

==================================================
Environment Variables to Configure DIRAC Behaviour
==================================================

There is a small number of environment variables that can be set to control the behaviour of some DIRAC
components. These variables can either be set in the ``bashrc`` file of a **client or server** installation or set manually
when desired.

DIRAC_DEBUG_DENCODE_CALLSTACK
  If set, debug information for the encoding and decoding will be printed out

DIRAC_DEBUG_STOMP
  If set, the stomp library will print out debug information 

DIRAC_DEPRECATED_FAIL
  If set, the use of functions or objects that are marked ``@deprecated`` will fail. Useful for example in continuous
  integration tests against future versions of DIRAC

DIRAC_GFAL_GRIDFTP_SESSION_REUSE
  If set to ``true`` or ``yes`` the GRIDFT SESSION RESUSE option will be set to True, should be set on server
  installations. See the information in the :ref:`resourcesStorageElement` page.

DIRAC_M2CRYPTO_SPLIT_HANDSHAKE
  If ``true`` or ``yes`` the SSL handshake is done in a new thread (default Yes)

DIRAC_NO_CFG
  If set to anything, cfg files on the command line must be passed to the command using the --cfg option.

DIRAC_USE_M2CRYPTO
  If ``true`` or ``yes`` DIRAC uses m2crypto instead of pyGSI for handling certificates, proxies, etc.

DIRAC_VOMSES
  Can be set to point to a folder containing VOMSES information. See :ref:`multi_vo_dirac`

DIRACSYSCONFIG
  If set, its value should be (the full location on the file system of) a DIRAC cfg file, whose content will be used for the DIRAC configuration
  (see :ref:`dirac-cs-structure`)

DISABLE_WATCHDOG_CPU_WALLCLOCK_CHECK
  This variable only makes sense for DIRAC pilots. When set, the wallclock check done within the watchdog is disabled.

Commit message:

load more than one DIRACSYSCONFIGFILE

docs/source/AdministratorGuide/ServerInstallations/environment_variable_configuration.rst, after:

.. _bashrc_variables:

==================================================
Environment Variables to Configure DIRAC Behaviour
==================================================

There is a small number of environment variables that can be set to control the behaviour of some DIRAC
components. These variables can either be set in the ``bashrc`` file of a **client or server** installation or set manually
when desired.

DIRAC_DEBUG_DENCODE_CALLSTACK
  If set, debug information for the encoding and decoding will be printed out

DIRAC_DEBUG_STOMP
  If set, the stomp library will print out debug information 

DIRAC_DEPRECATED_FAIL
  If set, the use of functions or objects that are marked ``@deprecated`` will fail. Useful for example in continuous
  integration tests against future versions of DIRAC

DIRAC_GFAL_GRIDFTP_SESSION_REUSE
  If set to ``true`` or ``yes`` the GRIDFT SESSION RESUSE option will be set to True, should be set on server
  installations. See the information in the :ref:`resourcesStorageElement` page.

DIRAC_M2CRYPTO_SPLIT_HANDSHAKE
  If ``true`` or ``yes`` the SSL handshake is done in a new thread (default Yes)

DIRAC_NO_CFG
  If set to anything, cfg files on the command line must be passed to the command using the --cfg option.

DIRAC_USE_M2CRYPTO
  If ``true`` or ``yes`` DIRAC uses m2crypto instead of pyGSI for handling certificates, proxies, etc.

DIRAC_VOMSES
  Can be set to point to a folder containing VOMSES information. See :ref:`multi_vo_dirac`

DIRACSYSCONFIG
  If set, its value should be (the full locations on the file system of) one of more DIRAC cfg file(s) (comma separated), whose content will be used for the DIRAC configuration
  (see :ref:`dirac-cs-structure`)

DISABLE_WATCHDOG_CPU_WALLCLOCK_CHECK
  This variable only makes sense for DIRAC pilots. When set, the wallclock check done within the watchdog is disabled.
